like to welcome all of you. I'm Elliot
Gersonen with the Aspen Institute. I'd
first like to thank Talma and Joe
Gildenhorn who are the ones responsible
for this terrific series of
conversations. Thank you. with authors
and we're especially happy when they're
here
today. And I have to say I I had no idea
when I I think we had dinner it was
about a year ago and uh Sid mentioned
that he was working on a book. I had no
idea whatsoever what an incredible book
it would be and what a splash uh it
would cause. Uh however, when I did get
the galleys a few months later, I knew
that this was going to be an
extraordinary book. Uh received
incredibly well, but even then I
couldn't have predicted the kind of
response it's gotten in the last couple
of weeks uh with with extraordinary
reviews really around the world. and and
Sid is now spending a great bit of his
time just going around and talking about
it. You may have heard heard him on
National Public Radio the other morning.
He was just at the museum uh uh being
interviewed and uh I I just can't
frankly remember a work of non-fiction
about a scientific topic uh that has
gotten this kind of response and I'm
sure will continue to get this kind of
response. I think uh if you if you do
get the book, you're not going to be
able to put it down. It's really a tour
to force uh with brilliant insights uh
that aren't just about the scientific
quest of our age which is uh uh
treatments for cancer but about
literature about history about culture.
Uh, so it's it's really a remarkable
book. And so even I might also add, if
the last book you read about science,
particularly one with this many pages
and this heavy, was that dreaded high
school chemistry text, forget that and
and please pick this up and and read it.
Maybe just to start, Sid, and we will
have a conversation as usual and then
open it up to questions. given this
whirlwind that you're on, who's looking
after your patients?
Well, thankfully these days we first of
all, thank you for having me here. Um,
it's been a it's been a real pleasure.
Elliot um Elliot was one of the few
people who saw the book at a time when
the book was not even in galley stage,
but it was a sheath of of manuscript um
as it were. And and as you know, writing
a book, a book is becomes your baby. Um
and and to see the the embryionic stage
of that um for me it was a wonderful
experience talking to Elliot right
through this. So thank you. Um who's
taking care of my patients? Well
thankfully these days in medicine we
work in in teams such that uh
responsibilities are more divided. But
you know what's funny about it is that
medicine in a s certain sense the the
the the more evocative the more shamanic
aspects of medicine can't be done in the
team. you always have one doctor and
that doctor he or she becomes your
doctor for life and that's that's the
most most moving and most profound
things about medicine. So um even as I
do this I actually check in usually
every morning um I have a staff I check
in every morning and whenever I need to
to be on the phone I am I'm on the
phone. Now that said I'll tell you a
little aside in all of this which is
that my book tour continues but then I'm
on call through Thanksgiving. Um, so I I
land from I land from I land on a plane
from Toronto. I drive uh to the hospital
actually um and start rounding on
patients. And the good news about that
is that it keeps you humble and it keeps
your eyes on the real situation which is
uh the job is to to take care of
patients. Well, just on that note, Sid,
what as as someone who is a devoted
clinician and a researcher, what
inspired you to to write a book like
this? Um, so
um, one of the reasons was I was
responding to a peculiar vacuum that
existed around the subject. I mean
cancer is a disease that in just in
epidemiological, biological, political
ways, cultural ways has invaded our
public consciousness so deeply that you
cannot open a newspaper without
encountering the word. You cannot um you
cannot walk or talk in in in a social
context without encountering uh someone
whose life has been directly affected by
cancer. Um and yet um what was amazing
to me while I was training as a fellow
was that there was no book really about
its history. I mean that vacuum was
astonishing to me. There have been
attempts to write histories of little
pieces of this. Richard Reik's book
about the politics of the war on cancer
is is an interesting precursor to this.
Um there have been attempts to write um
around the idea of cancer particularly
in 1970s but there was an enormous
vacuum. Um, you know, there's a there's
a when Hillary uh climbed Everest, he
was asked why he climbed Everest. And he
said, "I climbed it because it it was
there." And I felt as if I mean, this
book is by by no means am I trying to
say it's grandiose enough like climbing
Everest, but um but I wrote this book
because it was not there. Um because in
a certain fundamental sense, it didn't
exist. And and the book really grew out
of a a question that a patient had asked
me. But this variations of this question
have appeared through the lives of every
single person who's in who's in cancer
medicine. And the question was this
woman I was treating for abdominal
cancer said, you know, I'm willing to go
on with treatment, but I need to know
what it is that I'm battling. Um, and it
was a very humbling question because not
only could I not tell her in the fullest
sense of the word, but I also couldn't
point to a book that would inform her
about what it was she was battling. And
this is the most legit legitimate of
questions that a patient could ask you.
What is its history? What is the origin?
Um, where are we going? What happens
next? And so the book is in some ways a
600page answer to that question. And I
it couldn't be a shorter answer because
this is the length of the of the history
itself. And and then and then you call
it a
biography and and which is which is an
unusual choice and and obviously
suggests that you see something very
human about this thing that you're
writing about. And that continues to be
a metaphor throughout the book uh about
its mind, about its psyche, you know,
perhaps a deranged psyche nonetheless.
But why why biography? So, you know, I
didn't arrive at that word until quite
late into writing the book. I I I did
have a feeling while I was writing that
the word history was too inert. Uh it
didn't suggest the depth the the the the
visceral nature and certainly didn't
encapsulate the fact that this also
threaded through this book importantly
are the stories of my patients
particularly Carla and others. So, so I
was looking for something that would
capture that idea more richly. Um, and
and as I said to you, the word history
seemed just too inert to capture that
idea. Um, you know, cancer is not a
single disease as we know. It is is a
multitude of diseases, but there are
enough there are deep enough biological,
political and cultural themes that cut
through this biology um or cut through
this disease that really begins to
justify or legitimize the possess of
writing about it as if it was not
something but someone um and that human
quality. I wanted to suggest that human
quality. So it was somewhere in the
middle of the book I sort of said, well
the word history is just not right and
maybe the word biography captures that
that idea more metaphorically and hence
the word biography and and the book and
we'll come back to this is is a
collection of extraordinary biographies
not just Carla your patient but of
famous figures and in the fight against
cancer and we'll talk about that but
let's just stick with history before we
move up to the
contemporary. What what are the first
references to what we now know is
cancer?
Well, the very first references are are
a little bit hard to tease apart because
the word even doesn't exist. Um, the
word we'll come to the ar will arrive at
the moment that the that the word sort
of hits the medical and cultural
vocabulary of our human history. Um, but
we think that these are cancers because
their descriptions remind us of
something that can only be similar to
cancer. The very first time actually
interestingly there's this idea that's
been floating around that cancer is a
disease of modernity, that there's
something modern about cancer. But in
fact, interestingly um the very first
time the word can a disease like cancer
is described comes to us from the very
oldest textbook of medicine that we that
human beings have ever seen and that's
the Edwin Smith papyrus. The Edwin Smith
Papyrus written sometime around 2500 BC
and then retranscribed sometime around
1500 or 1600 BC. So this is about 4,000
odd years ago. describes a case um in
which uh in which the the scribe talks
about a disease in the breast which
resembles breast cancer. His his words
are are are very beautiful. Uh he says
well here it is he he describes it is he
says it's cold and dense much like a a
kind of fruit that that he was familiar
with and he says but remember but it's
not it's not warm and therefore it's not
inflammatory. It's not an inflammation.
It's not an infection. it does not break
water or bleed water. And again, this
idea of that it's discriminated from
from an infection was very important. So
that's the that's the very first time we
hear about it. And um did it say
anything about whether it could be
treated and and that's that's what's
that's what's really chilling. Um so in
in the papyrus, I immoteep uh who's the
Egyptian scribe usually writes a little
remedy um for every disease and for
cancer he has a lovely line. He says
there is no treatment. Um and it it's
that moment of silence that strikes you.
Um as you know it really chills chills
your bones. Um I was talking to an
ocologist about this and he said he said
to me that if you look at Imoteep's book
um and it doesn't it written in 2500 BC
and the description and the humility
doesn't raise goosebumps then you're in
the wrong profession. You know you
should not be doing oncology. If you
can't go back to that book and say
here's a disease that was written about
2500 years ago and and here I am in 2010
with struggling struggling for some
kinds of cancer struggling like that and
saying essentially saying to myself
there is no there's no cure and then I
was struck by another snippet of of
history in in the very early history
when you talk about the Persian queen
and was reminded of you know the the
image of Helen of Troy and the face that
launched a thousand ships Tell us how
tell us how this Persian queen and her
apparent cancer had similarly perhaps
profound effects on history. Well, so
again, uh we we don't we're not 100%
sure that Queen Atossa of Persia did
have cancer, but she has a disease which
is described so vividly again
reminiscent of of cancer. So Queen Atasa
was the wife of Darius. um a very
powerful queen, a very powerful wife of
a very powerful king, the king of
Persia, which as as you might remember
was actually the the the the epicenter
of civilization at that moment. And
Heroditus records her story. Um she is
diagnosed with a disease. We only know
it from the Greek as a mass. Um and uh
she interestingly she had the
opportunity to avail of every phys
physician in Babylon, but she doesn't.
She covers herself in shame. Um, and she
refuses to talk about it and ultimately
she is treated and possibly cured by a
Greek slave whose name is Deosides. Um,
and we don't know exactly what happened
but but given if it was cancer was
probably a kind of a primitive version
of a mastctomy or a lumpctomy that was
performed. We we know little exactly
about it. And then uh as Heroditus tells
us uh Deosidities who was from Greek
from Greece and captured into Persia
begs the queen as a a reward for his um
for his curing her. He begs the queen to
ask to to bring him back to Greece. And
the way the queen does this is by asking
Darius her husband to not invade Skidia
which is on the eastern border but to
invade Greece instead so that
Deosidities the slave can be brought
back to his native Greece. Um and and in
fact this is what happens. This is how
Heroditus records the story and he says
that essentially that movement from the
eastern face of Persia to the western
face of Persia which is Greek launches
the Greco Persian war. And the Greco
Persian war of course is the most seinal
one of the most seinal moments in the
history of the west. And so there's a
point that's made that it's actually a
toss cancer that launches a thousand
ships. Um but in this clandestine way
she he cannot speak about it. And so
cancer even in this kind of primitive um
manner leaves its fingerprint on the
ancient word. Very very moving story. So
well I mean actually even until 1950 the
New York Times wouldn't even print the
word cancer. So this stigma continued
for for millennia. Isn't that an amazing
story? So Fanny Rosen as I tell Fanny
Rosen's story from an interview in this
book and Fanny Rosenau some people here
might know was an important advocate for
breast cancer. Um uh and she was a
survivor and she it's a it's a it's a
tragic story. Uh she she calls up the
New York Times in 1950 and she wants to
place an advertisement in the Times um
saying, "I'd like to start a an advocacy
group, a survivors group for women with
breast cancer." And then she's put on
hold. Um and then about several minutes
later, she's puzzled. Several minutes
later, the society editor of the Times
gets on the phone and says, "Um, well,
you know, Mr. Rosen, we can't print the
words breast and cancer in the New York
Times. Would you mind if we said a
support group for women with chest
diseases?" Um, this is I I made it a
point actually of of this is this is not
so long ago. I made it a point when the
New York Times came to came to see me in
the laboratory um and to review this
book, I made it a point to say this to
Charles McGrath and I said, actually
print that story uh as a reminder to to
to yourself and to me uh to remind us
what what this history is. Let one other
aspect of history before we come to
closer to the present and that of course
is other than those kinds of instances
where you imagine that based on the
circumstances it must have been cancer.
Uh there really are few references
historically to cancer in part because
we didn't live as long. I mean all
that's right. I mean absolutely cancer
is an age related disease. Um it's
important to realize that cancer is an
age- related disease but it's not only
an age related disease. We have all
everyone I'm sure knows of a 36 year old
or a 40y old or a foury old or a seveny
old diagnosed with cancer. So uh let it
be clearly said that although it's an
age- related disease it is not only an
age- related disease um but the
longevity the expanse of human longevity
has absolutely increase the prevalence
um and the incidence of cancer in the
world particularly some kinds of cancer
um I'm going to take a little little
aside here and say that that was
actually an interesting challenge in
writing the book and that challenge was
how does one uncover how does one make
this a human story um when the human
beings
have disappeared um when the when the
when the when these patients um have
disappeared and and someone asked me
well how did you write this book and I
said well you know the the the boon and
the bane of writing this book was that I
I wrote it very linearly so I started on
page one and ended on page I'm not going
to dissuade anyone on page
six page
50 on page 500 whatever it is um but
what was because I wrote linearly um and
because I had a very acute sense that I
needed to have the patients in the book.
Um when I would get stuck, I would say,
well, where's the story? Who is the
first child who was treated for
leukemia? And because I was so stuck, I
would say, well, unless I found the
story of that child, this book couldn't
be written. Um and it became for me a
kind of an internal propulsion engine. I
said, well, you know, this is the reason
I have to discover uh the story. May may
I take an aside? Tell the story of this
child because for me it was very
metaphorically rich. The book is
dedicated, by the way, if you open the
book, um, to Robert Sandler, uh, 1945 to
1948 and to those who came before and
after him. Um, and we don't know until
we reach the middle of the book who
Robert Sander is, but I will tell you,
um, I don't think I'd break a minute of
suspense by this, but um, I became
obsessed with with finding the first
child who was treated with chemotherapy
in Boston, Robert. I didn't know his
name from Sydney Farber's papers. I knew
his his initials. I knew it was RS and I
knew he had a twin uh whose name was um
ES and uh I started I knew the boy had
lived for about 3 months after he came
to Sydney Farber's clinic had a
remission and then died. And of course
that remission becomes an incandescent
moment for for cancer research because
it's the first time that a an aggressive
cancer has been sent into remission by a
medicine alone. Not surgery, not
radiation, but through a medicine. And
it really propels the war on cancer to
Robert Sander and is in some ways the
beginning of this incredible movement.
You know, every time the breast cancer
patients march on the river, they're in
some sense replying back to a legacy
that involves at least to some extent
the Tossa, but also Robert Sandler, but
of course I didn't know his name. And so
I was there sitting in Boston sending
out emails and messages saying, "Well,
I'm in Boston. He lived in Boston
somewhere in this world. He has a twin,
you you know, so I would send a message
saying if you happen to have a twin who
was treated for leukemia in in Boston,
then please contact me. Um, you know,
I'm writing this book and there was no
reply, nothing, just blank. And so I was
disheartened and I went to India to my
parents house and someone said to me,
well, there's a historian um who lives a
few blocks down and who had been
interested a long time ago in the
history of chemistry and had had some
brief intersection with Sydney Farber.
Would you like to go and see him? So I
said, "Of course, I'll go see him." So I
I I drive over three blocks from from my
parents house a thousand miles away from
Boston. I walk into this uh this man's
house and he talk starts talking about
his his his experiences and he says,
"Oh, you know, I had been to Sydney
Farber's Hospital in 1958 and if you're
interested, I have a roster of all these
leukemic patients that I was treat that
he was treating." Um and in that roster
is a picture and it's a picture of
Robert Sandler, RS. Um, and so I I ran
back when I flew back, but I ran back to
to Boston and then using the Boston
Public Library records, I could find the
death records for RS. Um, and then by
cross referencing those records, I could
find the mother uh the name of the
mother and ultimately a photograph of
the child and then 15 or 20 minutes
later I was in Dorchester standing in
the home of Robert Sandler. Now this
story carries a lot of meaning for me
personally because it number one it's a
metaphor for me because it's a metaphor
for why this book could be written. It
could be only written through a process
of serendipity and discovery um and a
kind of human process trying to
understand my own history um which would
not be possible if I hadn't found Robert
Sandler who came from you know a
thousand miles away from where I was
looking. So it's a long aside but but I
think an important aside and and every
single minute in the book whenever I
felt the pulse of this book drop unlike
writing an inert history I said to
myself go find go find the patient and
and the book will solve itself and and
it it it's a wonderful thing to
experience with as you would imagine a
book on a topic like this it's full of
epiphies and frustrations and dead ends
but also the toy you know, the the tears
and the joy. Yes. But those human
stories, you know, whether it's whether
it's RS or whether it's Carla, but then
there are also the stories of the
pivotal figures in in in medical history
and and and they all tell their own
stories. You mentioned Sydney Farber and
I'd like to come back to that. But there
there's also the story uh about uh about
William Stewart Hollstead. Yes. uh and
and you know the this the most sign
really the only treatment of cancer for
its first hundred years from 1850 to
1950 was surgery. Yes. And then you just
north of us in in in in Baltimore H
Hallstead is named on his names on
buildings and hospitals. But tell us the
story of of what that what that meant
and this you know that kind of
aggressive treatment and what the
lessons were from that. Well, Holstead
is a complicated character. Um, many
people um, I I'll tell you why, but
Holstead is a complicated character.
Many people read this book and say
Holstead is the villain of the book. And
I say that's absolutely not true for me.
Actually, there's a passage in the book
which was taken out early on in which I
talk about how as an oncologist um, and
perhaps even as a cancer patient, you
develop a kind of peculiar sympathy for
Holstead because here he was trying his
best to do what he could do his best at
and that was surgery. But let me tell
you the story. hosted is an incredible
character. My my train this morning
which was stuck for an hour
um took me through Baltimore and
actually gave me a sense again made me
think once again of H Hallstead.
Holstead
was a brilliant surgeon probably one of
the most brilliant surgeons in the
history of surgery. Um and he um he he
became uh compulsively
uh interested in breast cancer. um and
he had picked up this idea. He had gone
to Europe um at a time when surgery uh
had had undergone an immense uh
improvement in Europe. In fact, these
surgical improvements we talk about um
had changed the the entire face of
cancer medicine for the first time. Uh
and surgery of course still remains a
very central player in in cancer in the
treatment of cancer patients. But
Holstead had gone to Europe and he had
he had come upon this frustration which
is that women with breast cancer would
be would be treated with surgery but
then the cancer would relapse again
often locally. So you'd have you'd have
a mass a lump it would be taken out and
then six or seven months later there
would be cancer around that same site.
and Halstead um became a kind of victim
or or
or an emblem of a theory that has runs
deeply through the book which is
actually a theory that's not about
cancer alone but has something to do
with the human psyche which is if
something is good then more of that
something must be better um particularly
in cancer um so Holstead comes back from
Europe um but he comes back from Europe
by the way with an interesting problem
and that is that he has discovered um he
He's very interested in anesthesia. Um,
and and of course the the most prominent
anesthesia at that time is cocaine. Um,
and so he begins to inject himself with
cocaine because he wants to try to to
find the right doses for his patients.
And of course within a few weeks he's an
addict and he tries to detox himself by
using morphine. Um, and then he becomes
addicted to morphine. Um, and so here he
is swiveing between these two
addictions, cocaine and morphine. Um,
and he's he checks himself into, you
know, the incredible discipline of him
is part of this book. The the discipline
of him saying to himself, well, I'm now
clearly an addict. Uh, cocaine and
morphine, but I will manage by
controlling the dose so precisely that I
will smooth out the addiction through
the holiday so that I can perform
surgery. So, so here is Halstead
um addicted injecting himself coming
back to the operating room. And while
he's doing this, he's inventing the most
radical attack on breast cancer. He's
gone back to Europe and he said to
himself, well, if the reason for relapse
is local recurrence, then the answer
must be we need to excavate more. We
need to cut out more. And by cutting
more, we must that must mean curing
more. And so he sort of lunges himself
step by step towards more and more
aggressive radical dissections such that
now he is now not only taking out the
breast but muscles underneath the chest
and the collar bone in some cases
Halstead not Halstead but his students
you know rib cage uh pieces of the rib
bone um now but that said he he he
becomes so compulsively attached to this
um and then there's a moment in that
history which is particularly poignant
he invents a word for this he calls it
radical surgery. Now, Halstead means
that word to mean radical from the same
root that the word radish arises from,
meaning root. He's trying to attack the
roots of cancer. But there's a pun in
that word. Halstead has a very beautiful
ear for for words. There's a pun in the
word. And radical of course also means
aggressive. And radical surgery
essentially then borrows itself as a
root as it were into the psyche of
surgery. um what patient what woman now
offered the option of radical versus
non-radical surgery for cancer was going
to take non-radical surgery as her
option right so it becomes the word
itself becomes a metaphor the word
becomes the war um and it takes this is
the astonishing astonishing thing Elliot
it takes 90 years it takes 90 years and
an enormous resistance among surgeons
before you finally undo that theory and
then it's done from from Europe we like
Jeffrey Kanes to start at Europe.
Jeffrey Kanes the the the the more
famous brother or the less famous
brother of uh of John May and Kanes um
was a surgeon was a wartime surgeon and
um I I and as I said one of the things
that I wanted to do in the book is I I
had to in order to write the book
because I was stuck I had to go to
London to look through Jeffrey Kane's
notebooks and there buried in his
notebooks in 1930 something is a little
line from Jeffrey Kane's which
says I'm not sure I'm paraphrasing the
book tell you the exact that line says
I'm not sure that for this particular
woman who he's treating the radical
approach is correct. Perhaps she should
have been treated with a local mastctomy
or lumpctomy. So what he's doing is he
from in this tiny chamber in London he
has pricricked radical surgery with a
lancet and it will take another 50 years
before a clinical trial can be launched
that ultimately tells us that that what
does it say about the culture of
medicine that it took that long for that
recognition. It says it says it says
something about the culture of medicine.
Unfortunately, the culture of medicine
repeats itself much like history. You
know, it repeats itself just as acutely
in a matter of another five or 10 years
because radical surgery then becomes
radical chemotherapy. Right? So, so it's
it it says something about the history
of medicine that I don't think medicine
often wants to hear. And again, it says
the old dictim, if something is good,
then more of that something must be
better. And that's not right.
Let let's move back to Sydney Farber and
and and the work he does in a basement
in Boston and then how that leads
through the remarkable remissions in
childhood leukemia to Mary Lazer and the
war on cancer and and and what that and
how that unfolds. Sure. Um
so you know for for a book like this
obviously you need a central anchor. Um
and very early on in the book I I chose
Sydney Farber for a certain set of
reasons. I mean this story this is a
story that's so large it could be told
through the eyes of a thousand different
ways. It could be told through the eyes
of Halstead actually. Um I happen to
choose Sydney Farber for a very
particular reason and it's a
metaphorical reason and the reason is
that Farber of course makes a very
seinal contribution to the history of
cancer in the invention of the very
first chemotherapy. He's actually second
but he becomes first because the the the
other form of chemotherapy arises from a
war gas and has to be secret. Uh it's a
secret until the war blows over
essentially. Um but Farber invents uh
chemotherapy um and he therefore begins
to imagine the the idea of attacking
cancer using chemicals. But here's what
happens to Farber. Having done this,
having emerged out of his basement to
now start treating children. Farber
underos a second transformation. And the
second transformation is a
transformation from a scientist into a
political activist into a political
voice. He essentially collaborates with
Mary Lazer to become uh to to to to
launch the war on cancer and he becomes
he he provides uh scientific legitimacy
to this war in a sense that Mary Lasker
herself couldn't she was uh she was not
a scientist um although very much a
friend of the sciences um and so
essentially it's this double
transformation of Farber the fact that
Farber comes out of his basement and
enters the political world which mirrors
of course the emergence of cancer itself
from a whispered about disease into a
political phenomenon. So I saw this
parallel occurring between Farber's own
life and between the emergence of cancer
as a phenomenon in public life and
therefore fiber was chosen. So going
back to Sydney Farber, Sydney Farber um
through a series of of um of amazing
accidents uh leaning actually back to a
work of a woman called Lucy Wills um an
English woman, eccentric um English
woman. There's a lovely story about Lucy
Wills which is not in this book. She was
a fanatic about bike riding. She lived
at Oxford um and she loved riding her
bicycle um and for for the for the
longest time she would she refused all
forms of transport. And um when she was
about 30 something she had already
discovered this idea that um she had
discovered the notion that chemicals
could turn on and turn off blood and
that idea would eventually give birth to
fiber chemotherapy. But we returning
back to uh returning back to um Lucy
Wils she would move through Oxford and
she didn't have a bell and she would
often scream at people. She would say,
"Move out of my way. Move out of my
way." Instead of, you know, sort of
ringing her bell was, it was again an
example of the way she was so in the 19,
you know, in the 1920s so driven uh that
she had found very unusual for a woman
of her in that time to have found that
uh to have made that discovery and
publicized it. But that's Lucy Wils.
Coming back to Farber, Farber um then
invents this this form of chemotherapy
has these brief remissions, five, six,
12 month remissions. um but then uses
that idea to say well there must be
chemicals that can attack cancer and if
there are if there's one such chemical
if there's one such strategy there must
be a host of such strategies and he
begins and he launches his first that's
his first experiment his second
experiment is actually an experiment in
media is an experiment in not in the in
the scientific laboratory but sort of an
experiment in public public service or
an experiment in in in the human world
and he says to himself Well, in order to
fund this effort, we need to create a a
we need to create a mascot. Um, we need
a symbol. Um, we need a we need a human
being that that this entire this massive
effort can be hung upon. And he in the
moment of genius, he finds, you know, he
he he collaborates with the variety club
in Boston and he's told to find this
mascot, this this one one one child, and
he can't find them because his child
children upstairs are are miserable.
They're all, you know, they're they have
leukemia. They're throwing up. These
chemotherapies are making them sick.
There's one child who who looks healthy
enough and he doesn't have leukemia and
his name is unfortunately his name is
Inar Gustafson. This is Boston in 1950s
and he says to himself, "My god, Anar
Gustiffson will never sell a war on
cancer. This child is from northern
Maine. He's of Swedish descent. Um,
picturesque is a picture of him in the
book. Um but his name is Anor Gustson
Farber says we're gonna call you Jimmy.
Uh and so whether Gusten agreed or not
he became Jimmy and of course this is
the birth of the Jimmy fund. The Jimmy
fund is barber what I call Farber's
second experiment. Farber's second
experiment is an experiment in in in
finding out how you can how you can
create a a mascot for for the war and
Jimmy becomes the mascot for the war and
then having having made Jimmy Farber
then launches his third and the biggest
experiment of all and that is when he
leases with Mary Lazer um to persuade
Nixon to launch the war on cancer and
this is the time of the moon. Exactly.
So remember we put ourselves back in
that moment. This is a time that of
course we're coming off the Second World
War. Um, this is post-war America in its
in its sort of uh cultural zenith. Um,
men have landed on the moon. The idea
that you can have a what was called a
moonshot for cancer, that you would
conquer cancer shortly if you poured in
enough resources was very much part of
of this culture. And Mary Lazer um
enters this world, she had already
entered this, but Mary Lazer entered
this world like a like a typhoon. Um she
Mary Lazer is um is a name writ large uh
across the history of American science.
She was an entrepreneur. Um she was a
force of nature. Um people talk about
still people remember Mayor Lasker as
being someone who could inihilate
resistance. She would walk into a room
and she would not the word no didn't
exist in her vocabulary. Um it didn't
she she it was not part of her the
day-to-day dealings with life. There's a
lovely picture of her, I think, in this
book, sitting in her um sitting in her
apartment. Uh her apartment was all
white. She loved the color white. And
she every piece of it was curated, even
the flowers. Um and and there's another
picture of her standing in front of this
beautiful Monae. And for the for the
longest time, I said I thought to
myself, it was taken outside the Museum
of Modern Art. And then someone said,
"Actually, no, the Monae belongs to Mary
Lazer." So just to remind us incredibly
wealthy uh but uh but someone who really
dedicated her life and her wealth in
fact um to cancer um and so she finds in
Farber her ally um and she begins to use
unbelievable resources um resources that
are both um financial but also cultural.
the idea that you can tap into into
public consciousness and activate
certain buttons, this this kind of
technology that Mary Lasker invented,
which is, you know, go and talk to the
editor of Reader Digest and place this
article there tomorrow, um was was very
unique actually. We we we take it a
little bit for granted now, but the idea
that she would call up an editor and
say, "Well, you know what? if next week
you ran ran an article on breast cancer
and famously she went to Anne Landers um
and said well what if you placed this
advertisement um in the newspaper saying
you know uh vote yes for the war on
cancer and so forth so Mary Alaska and
Sydney Farber really launched the war
and its its culmination again there's a
reproduction here is this advertisement
from 1969 which is really a kind of a a
marker in which which begins with Mr.
Nixon, you can cure cancer. Some some
people might remember this from from the
papers. It ran in multiple papers. And
there's a line in there which is very
evocative. It says, "Why don't we cure
cancer for America's 200th birthday?"
Um, what a gift that would be. So, that
birthday has passed. But and and and
let's talk about that that sort of the
the the what you call in the book the
culture of of cure in the United States
and this this appeal for whether it's
the radical surgery or the or the the
the magic bullet or the or the targeted
chemical and and and and what what has
the results been of of that kind of of
culture focused so much on on cure,
Right. Well, I think one of the for me
one of the most interesting discovery
aspects of the book was exactly that
culture of cure and you know as you know
cancer is not the only place where that
culture of cure um has has made it left
a deep impact. I mean even when I read
the newspapers uh today about foreign
policy for instance, it makes me wonder
how much we can still learn from
medicine, how much medicine can learn
from reading the newspaper. This idea
that that there are curative solutions
to things that are very difficult and
complex is of course writ large through
our culture. Um it on one hand um it it
it can break through nihilism and in in
the case of cancer that neihilism was it
was very important to break through that
nalism because people say well you never
cure this disease you know it's too
complicated but on the other hand of
course that culture of cure very quickly
tips into hubris um and that tension
between optimism and hubris is very much
part of the book it's very much part of
our world Hey, no sooner has a new drug
being released um from from the far you
know in into the pharmacy that we're
talking about cure again. Um so so this
is with us this is going to stay with us
for a long time particularly the the
metaphorical cultural aspects and I
actually explore them very and and and
in in that context one of the one of the
uh implications of that culture you
suggest is is is
a lack of focus on prevention or a
notion somehow that prevention is almost
unamerican that we'll cure it we don't
have to prevent it and in fact there's a
line in the book which which in which I
think the the the Chicago Times actually
says this. It says it's quite clear to
us that that there's a there's a
sentiment that's going around in
sciences that prevention is
unamerican. So um well so let's talk a
little bit about about prevention. You
know, in in the um in the 1960s and
1970s when these chemotherapies were
arising, there was certainly a dip in in
in prevention research and because again
people were so convinced that much like
smallox um this disease or polio again
there's a long section on polio uh in
this book because polio is the is the
direct antecedent or the precedent to to
cancer and the fact that polio became
prevent preventable through
vaccination rate writ itself large
through the history of cancer if we
could pour in resources um in fact
what's interesting is that the polio
virus was not deeply understood when the
polio vaccine was developed it's it's a
forgotten part of our history um David
Yoshinsky who wrote this wonderful book
on polio which you may have read called
polio an American story um writes about
this this idea that that the vaccine was
developed through a series of
circumstances which had some knowledge
about what happened to the polio, what
the polio virus was, but not the deepest
knowledge. And that notion that you
could somehow cut quickly to the chase
as it were um without understanding the
deep biology of of of the cancer cell
was very much part of the 1960s. And it
it took um it took a a a very um it took
a very stringent statistical analysis
that was performed in 1987 for the first
time. It was updated again and again
1987, 1997 and most recently in 2007 um
to remind us that the war on cancer
using curative treatments was not really
going as well as we had thought it was
going. And that analysis comes to us
from John
Bart has been done elsewhere. Uh I call
John Bailard the nation's reminder and
chief of cancer. Uh he he he comes every
10 or odd years and he he comes and
reminds us. He's like the bean counter.
He tells us well wait a second just
before you get too happy here's what the
real numbers are. Um and he performs
this analysis for the first time in 1987
and he plots um cancer specific
mortality. We can talk about why that's
interesting and complicated. He plots
cancer specific mortality over time and
in fact shows that in if anything cancer
specific mortality has gone up between
since the since the war since the war
was declared. Yeah. Since the war was
declared. That was a very chilling
moment um uh for for for cancer
researchers. Um and one of one of the
points that Bailard makes in his 1987
article is that we are not spending
enough time or money on prevention. So
that by that time to some extent that
had already been rectified. So the
national cancer budget had been moved a
little bit more towards prevention. So
by the time that by the time Baylor had
written this article it had already been
part become part of of of the the
consciousness of the national cancer
institute. Two pieces of important
information. Number one is that BAR has
repeated this analysis in 1997 and 2007
most recently. Um and it turns out that
the picture has become much much more
positive. So having risen for until
1987, VA probably caught the war on
cancer at its worst moment um when the
when the effects of smoking particularly
among women from the 1950s was being was
being played out in the in the killing
fields of cancer uh 20 years later in
the 1970s 1980s and so forth. But since
the 19 since 197 for nearly about 15 to
20 years there has been a decline in
cancer specific mortality in the United
States and that is an enormous victory.
Um that curve the capacity to take a
curve uh that is rising inexorably bend
it at a plateau and move it downwards.
Um it's hard it's hard for me to uh to
really fathom what an enormous victory
it is. It is taking the natural course
of what would become or was becoming an
epidemic, turning it around and twisting
it downwards again. And some people
might say, well, you know, we're still
not winning the war on cancer. But that
the capacity to do that in human history
is unprecedented. Um, and I think that's
that's part of the victory of
prevention, therapy, education, cultural
shifts, etc. There's been no single
victory. Let's talk about victory in the
following context. as as a biographer,
most biographers when they write a book
confront at some point the death of of
the person about whom they're writing
and is it in any conceivable sense
possible to to contemplate the death of
cancer.
So it's an important question we we try
to you know tackle that question at the
end of the book. Um you know one thing
about writing the book I have to say
which made it particularly poignant is
that I while writing this book I didn't
know whether Carla would live or die at
the end of the book. Tell tell us about
so again I one of the stories that
threads the whole book together and
gives the book a human face is the story
of one of my patients who um goes
through chemotherapy for acute
lymphoplastic leukemia. the very tumor
that launches this revolution. Uh the
tumor that Farber first attacks and
eventually colleagues of Farbers or
friends of Farbers and and his students
eventually cure. And that cure in the
1970s really launches this idea that
cancer could potentially be a curable
disease and thereby launches the war on
cancer. Carla, my patient has this form
of leukemia, but in adults, the
leukemia, the cure rate sinks down to
about 30%. For reasons we don't know, 30
to 40%. Um, and and so Carla becomes of
course the beacon for this book, but
it's a beacon that that is not that that
is always moving to some extent. I I
sort of wrote this book and people say,
well, how did how did you write this
book? It was like driving without a
destination because in the end of the
book there was a 70% chance
statistically speaking that the book
would end with her demise. Um and that
would change the tone of the book and I
didn't know what tone it would take. I
mean what how does one write a book
without an ending. Um but she's alive u
five or six years since the book since
she had her disease. I hope she's been
cured. Um that brings us of course to
the idea of the death of cancer. again
the end of biography. Um the the story
in this book um is that one thing that
we've realized um and it's a it's not
just a biological realization but a
cultural and a political and a
philosophical realization about
ourselves is that cancer is stitched
into our genome. Um and that by that I
mean that the very genes that um in
their corrupted form cause cancer are
vital to the growth of cells. Um cells
contain genes that allow them to grow,
allow them to adapt, to survive, to
resist poisons, this is why we can
become multisellular human beings. But
if you take those very same genes that
allow embryos to develop, that allow our
hands to become hands. And if you
distort them, those are become cancer
genes. Now that moment again when the
first time that was realized in 1976 by
Harold Varmas among other people that
sent such a chill through the world of
cancer medicine cancer biology it's hard
to describe that because here we were
hoping that this gene would come from
outside this would be some exogenous
event um and of course carcinogens
activate these genes and thereby there
is an element in which cancer comes from
outside but the fundamental lesion in
many cancers not most sorry not all but
many cancers is a genetic lesion is a
genetic change a mutation in a gene that
sits in each and every one of our
chromosomes. Um it it is a part it is as
much a part of being a human being as
anything else. This is the very genetic
makeup and therefore the idea that we
will eliminate or eradicate cancer from
our world is by necessity a false idea.
This is not a disease that will we will
will be eliminated um from our lives and
our species. So what do we do? Um well
while writing this book I I went to see
Richard Pedo who discovered one of the
people who discovered the link between
lung cancer and smoking. And as I was
read leaving his office there's a little
slogan in his office which says death
before old death at old age is
inevitable but death before old age is
the frontier of medicine. Um and so
that's that's a pretty significant
thing. That's a pretty significant goal.
So if we could push the the frontier of
cancer uh as far as we can um in in
human longevity, I think that will mark
a kind of victory um not the death of
cancer but a kind of victory that will
change I think the history
of even with with all due humility would
really change the history of our
species.
Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen, let's
open to to your questions, please. And
if you could take the microphone, uh I
think that one's right in front of you.
Give us your name. And um my name is
Paula Gordon and I have a website called
uh Gordonancer theory.com which
originated out out of work I did on the
70s. Uh I had been able to meet and
interview many key people at that point
in time. Joseph Eels and uh Jisato
Maryama and John Holt uh among others.
Um and one of the things that influenced
my uh development of a of a theory of
carcinogenesis and
anti-carcinogenesis was the NIH
um symposium that was held on the
spontaneous remission or regression of
cancer in the 70s. And I think this is
still available through
Medlars at
NIH. Uh and what they did there and I
hope they'll repeat or someone will
repeat this uh kind of symposium is to
bring together all the anecdotal
evidence about the spontaneous
regression of cancer.
Um if you look at things like septasemia
and malaria and u um uh cobra bites you
know whole whole host of different
things had led to and the bottom line is
the thing that they all have in common
is that the immune system is hyped and I
wonder to what extent you might have
been looking at that. Well, you know,
this area, thank you. Very interesting
question. This area was dead. U was a
was a was a scorched minefield for
literally tens of years. Um it had
vanished almost from the consciousness
of there. There were these sort of
feeble attempts uh to activate the
immune system um to uh to to attack
cancer. But this was a was a desert. Um
and then all of a sudden this has
started to change. And I'll tell you a
couple of things that have started to
change about it. Um, most recently, the
idea that the immune system um has an
interaction with cancer had all had been
known way back. Um, and spontaneous
remissions were part of that part of
that theory. Um, but again, no one had
really been able to activate the immune
system very well. These these these were
anecdotal um cases. No one knew what was
up with them. But then most recently um
Jim Allison and among others has found
mechanisms that you can activate the
immune system and if you activate the
immune system much like the cancer cell
also has accelerators and breaks such
that we are not explosive we're not
exploding with imunological reactions. I
mean if our immune system went berserk
it is so powerful people call it a
sleeping giant. It's so powerful that it
can eat up our bodies within a matter of
a few days. We've seen that happen in
patients when it gets mis inact mis
inappropriately activated. Now Jim
Allison found a way of more subtly
activating the immune system and this
drug which is a blockade of a particular
molecule called CTLA4 was tested in
malignant melanoma metastatic melanoma.
That's the one disease in which the
immune system has in which spontaneous
remissions have occurred quite quite
importantly. And I was just reminded
this the trial was very positive. This
was a randomized phase three trial of
activation of the immune system against
malignant metastic melanoma. It was very
positive. But strikingly, I just as
Jimson reminded me a few weeks ago, he
said that there has been no drug in the
history of malignant metastatic melanoma
that's been that's showed a positive
result in survival. It's the only drug.
Um, so it reminds us that this is an
evolving frontier. We know very little
about it, but it's clearly an evolving
frontier for cancer medicine. I I I it
would probably rank among for treatment
probably rank among the top 10
directions that most cancer biologists
are looking today.
Another question.
Yes. Yes.
Oh, sorry. Let me just move this out.
Yeah. Hi, I'm Leah Goldseer. I'm
representing Baltimore.
Um, I wanted to find out other than not
smoking and eating highly toxic things
or exposing ourselves to radiation in
the sun etc. What do you do to prevent
yourself from getting cancer? And do you
feel that any type of vitamins or
supplements can help boost our immune
systems? Is there anything that we can
do to prevent cancer? you know, I follow
the NCI guidelines. Um, I follow the
guidelines that have been laid down
because I don't think that in I have not
seen convincing evidence um in anything
that I've read so far that talks about a
a rigorous enough preventive regimen
that will allow me to escape cancer. I
avoid carcinogens if I if I if I avoid
the known carcinogens. Um, but that
said, I'm eager to find out what the
unknown ones are. But there's but that
that universe is so wide and I find it
kind of um fans a a particular paranoia
about the world um which may or may not
prove to be true. Um so I I tell my
patients what I do. I tell them exactly
what guidelines I follow, but they're
very much part and parcel and I and I I
believe in supporting the most rigorous
possible trials to find more
susceptions. I don't I don't disbelieve
they exist. I just want to know what
they are so that I can avoid them.
what is being done to treat cancer in a
positive way where right now we're doing
everything to destroy it um by outside
means by chemicals by radiation by
surgery. What can we what is being done
in a positive way to boost our own
immune systems by treating or finding
stem cells or something to build our
immune systems from within. All of these
treatments are in their bare infancy.
the the the the one that I talked to
Paula about is probably the most mature
that I know of in terms of treatments
that uh that affect the immune system.
Every other thing I think that has been
tried before has turned out to have not
a very powerful effect and has certainly
not not stayed in random in in proper
randomized trial. I'll take a couple of
exceptions to that. Two exceptions. One
exception is uh the use of tmoxifen in
women who are at very high risk for
breast cancer. Um there have been very
clear trials that show that there's a
benefit to the use of prophylactic
tmoxifen. I hope we can find other other
mechanis other other ways to do this and
there there are um there are significant
side effects. So you have to
appropriately risk stratify women. The
second thing is the use of another
hormone therapy for men with prostate
cancer. The problem is that when the NCI
ran these trials, there was a decrease
in prostate cancer, but occasionally the
prostate cancers that did emerge from
people who had been from men who'd been
treated with this were unfortunately the
more aggressive kind. We don't know why.
So, it's a little bit of a double-edged
sword. Um, each of these treatments
comes with a deep cost. So, I think risk
stratifying up front followed by
appropriate prophylactic strategies is
probably the right thing to do. And and
you know, primary care internists are
very well verssed in this. if there's
someone, you know, speak up and and and
tell me what you do with your patients.
But that's that's what I do. Thank you.
Other Yes.
Hi. Uh Donna Christensen. I I have a
dear friend whose breast cancer seems to
have spread to liver. She'll literally
today be getting the results of the
biopsy. Um are there any treatments? And
specifically, she's hearing about things
like infrared in those looks sort of
like tanning beds uh or oxygenation
treatments. Is there any promise in
either of those or in anything else? Uh
never never tried in large enough. I
mean again there are case reports of of
ways in which you can sear cancer cells
to death uh in various sites of the
body. The liver has been a particularly
tough area because uh you know it's hard
to reach and there they're cells loaded
with enzymes all around it and therefore
can all cause all sorts of side effects
but um I would say all of that is in its
bare infancy.
So, so would you say no no no harm to at
least try it or is are there studies
going on that well I would say the best
with infrared or I would say the best
circumstances is to try I'm all for
trying things you know this book is
about people trying experime people
trying all sorts of things patients and
and and and p and doctors trying all
sorts of things I'm all for trying
things I'm only all for trying things
though if you can tell me what you're
trying and and do so in a way that
increases my knowledge as well and by by
that I mean I'm not being facitious I
enrolling in an appropriately guided
trial such that it doesn't become an
anecdote such that we every experience
contributes to the way I treat cancer
and to the way your friend gets treated
and to the way you know someone else's
mother might be treated for breast
cancer so I'm I'm very much in favor of
trials um but I want I want that word to
be very important trials are done in a
particular manner in this country and we
have to we have to think about that when
we do so let me just continue on that if
I if I can sit in terms trying things
and not in the context of of of the
situation with with Donna's friend. Uh
and you talk about this in the book as
well, you know, trying things at what
cost? Yes. Uh because one of the other
aspects of the culture of cure you talk
about in the United States is that we
were very late compared to Europe in
developing paliotative care for example
and restoring what you talk about as the
sanity and sanctity. Yes. Of the end of
life. And then also you talk about or
you ask the question if tarca for
example yes can add 12 days to the life
of someone with metastatic pancreatic
cancer yes do you do it or do you
consider the fact that it costs $26,000
for those 12 days? Well I'm I'm going to
give you two answer yeah two answers to
those questions. Number one um let's
talk a second about paliative care. Um I
I made it a I made it a very
self-conscious point in the book to
write the an entire chapter on palative
care and to actually title one of the
six sections of the book um from a from
from a quote um from a woman who was
first treated with palative care I'll
tell you the quote because it it opens
one of the books one of the chapters
it's called will you throw me out if I
don't get better that's one of the
sections um this is a woman who said to
her oncologist in 1960 she said I'm not
getting better. Will you will you now
stop treating me? And and this is what p
this is what the world of cancer became
so obsessed um with succeeding with
victory with the culture of cure as you
call it that it's obverse it's negative
um became failure. Um and if you if you
did not succeed then by by by its very
nature you would become a loser. And if
you were a loser then you were a pariah
of oncology. You were cast out to the
side. And make no mistake about the fact
that palative care is as much technology
as gleebeck. Um it had to be invented.
There was there was a resistance against
it. It had there was an inventiveness.
There was a resilience that needed that
needed to be needed to be brought out.
Um so ju just to remind us who who one
of the key figures were. There were many
key figures. Uh one of the key figures
in that story was Dame uh Cesaly
Saunders from Britain. um not a
coincidence actually that she was from
Europe uh where the culture of cure was
less uh less obsessed with with curing.
Um and Cesaly Saunders um said to
herself she was a nurse who retrained as
a doctor and she said she was going to
physically remove the dying from the
oncology wards because they had been
cast aside. Um and she um and I I quote
her in the book I I I quote her as
saying um you know taking palative care
is not the antimatter to the matter of
cancer care. It's not as if palative
care is against cancer but you know
we're not against the patient or we're
not we're not against the oncologist.
This is very much part of knowing what
cancer is and treating cancer. And it
seems to me um that until recently that
entire conversation in this country had
sort of collapsed. Uh we had forgotten
how to talk about end of life in a in a
sophisticated way. Um it doesn't have to
be just paliative care. Even the word
paliative has a kind of
a a kind of a a soft fluffy quality
about it which people resist. End of
caring for the end of life is one of the
most fundamental things that that that
we're doing. It is part very much part
of the healthc care crisis that we're
experiencing today. And yet much like
cancer itself, it's a conversation
that's oddly disappeared from the public
psyche. Um so someone recently asked me
about this book. They said, "Well, name
name one thing." They were doing an
interview and they said, "Well, how
would you change um how would you
change name a public policy direction
that that you would like to change
America?" And I said again, you know, I
said very humbly, my my only my my only
offering would be let's launch a
national conversation on P on on end of
life care. Um, which really talks about
what the benefits are, what the risks
are such that you and I can have a real
conversation about it. You know, tell
tell me that you you don't want tell me
that you don't want it. You tell me that
you don't want a kind of patronizing uh
approach to end of life care and let's
have a conversation about what that
means. that we're not spending a vast
part of our healthcare budget on the
last three months of life. So, so long
answer to your question about the role
of role of palative care and and the
directionality of cancer medicine.
Second point is you know what do we do
about the escalating costs of of you
know 12 days increase 25 days increase
it's a slightly more complex answer
there um I do think that if you look at
this history there's an iterative
process by which science occurs that 12
days is actually learning that 12 days
is important in the history of science
in the history of medicine because that
12 days becomes changes into 24 days
when you add another medicine it becomes
48 days when you add a third it becomes
64 when you change another variation and
this is the only way that we've moved
forward by by making iterative steps so
so I I I I have a I do have a resistance
to people who say well you know that
trial just showed 12 days increase
because that's the only way we learn and
I think that there has to be something
in this history which says that let's
record that 12 days because you know
because that that carries meaning
question uh Yes. Uh Susan and and then
and then Sharon.
Um Susan Blumenthal, thank you for an
extraordinary journey into the past,
present, and future uh of of cancer. Um
2,000 years ago, Hypocrates said uh
prevention is preferable to cure. Yet um
society spent such a small fraction on
prevention. In our country, only 3 to 5%
of our 2.6 trillion dollar healthcare
budget is spent on prevention. Um and in
part healthcare reform is trying to take
a uh a journey towards preventable
disease. When it comes to cancer, you
know, you've you've talked about it
being a heterogeneous disease that there
are many ways to cancer. So there's the
hope to modify genes that could express
cancer. Um taking medicines like
tmoxifen. Um we've learned for example
cervical cancer as a virus. So you might
be able to take a vaccine to prevent
certain types of cancer. Um and then uh
fairly lowcost behavioral interventions.
Around the world there are different
incidences of cancer. So in Japan
there's a high level of stomach cancer.
In England and in the United States high
levels of breast cancer. That area of
gene environment interaction seems to be
a very important one and yet has not
been well explored. Why do you think
that is? What can we learn about
environmental factors interacting with
normal genes and causing them to
misspell like with tobacco, perhaps
obesity? And how can we increase
investments in this important frontier
of 21st century cancer biology? I think
these are absolutely important
frontiers. Um the the one the the one
thing I'd like to see beginning to
happen, it's happening already is is to
bring prevention into the laboratory.
And by that I mean there's a there's
been a way these epidemiological studies
have been remarkably successful um in
delineating the role of carcinogens in
the world but even epidemiological
studies begin to reach their limit and
and the one thing that's sad is that
often these epidemological studies tell
us after the carcinogen has already been
released. One thing I'd love love love
to start happening and it's already
happening is if the is a kind of a
collaborative alliance between
epidemiologists and and and laboratory
scientists based on our understanding of
the cancer cell such that carcinogens or
protocarcinogens can be tested in the
laboratory long before they're released
into the public such that these these
things can these these elements these
these chemicals can be weeded out before
they before they reach the public. I
mean, you know, this is happening to
some extent with with pesticides and so
forth. So, so that's one element that's
already coming online as it were, a kind
of a new revamped molecular
epidemiology. Now, that said, um you
know, there there are viruses to contend
with. Um you you mentioned cervical
cancer um as as a major as a major cause
uh sorry, virus as a ma major cause for
cervical cancer. And I think I think the
diversity the sheer diversity of causes
really makes us rethink about how we can
prevent these and are there more subtle
markers that we should be looking at
long before cancer develops. Are there
more subtle markers that we can find
that will activate prevention research.
Just to give you one example of that, of
course, the papsmear itself was invented
um to find such a subtle marker. Right?
The idea that you could find a
pre-invasive lesion and thereby
intervene on cancer was a radical idea
in 19 you know 1960 odd when when the
papsmeir was developed. So so I think
you're you're exactly right that this is
the direction that we need to go go in
as far as you know the the 2% um of the
budget being spent on this. We talked
about this already. I think that's an
embarrassment. I have one more question
just to follow up and that is the area
of epigenetics is you know the the
notion a new field that there may be
when for example if you um if you smoke
and you develop cancer that that
misspelling in the gene could then be um
passed on to the next generation. Do you
think there's something to this?
Absolutely. I think there's something to
this. Um it's a rich field, but but we
can we can talk about it offline, but
it's a very rich field of epigenetics.
Sorry, Sharon. And then perhaps we have
one more question after that.
Um, my name is Sharon McB and um, this
actually piggybacks on part of your
question. Just if you could just wait
for the microphone. Thank you. The an
um, this piggybacks somewhat on your
question and your answer regarding
subtle markers.
Uh I'm part of a
um minority but it's growing of women
who have had breast cancer and survived
and then have an entirely new
occurrence. Yes. um the 20 26 years
later you get a new occurrence and I
guess it addresses the fact that you're
living longer and um yet we have no way
of knowing uh other than B one and two
about these subtle markers um and you
talk about the lack of funding and yet
we're talking here about preventive
care. How can we know what preventive
care if we don't recognize the subtle
markers? How can we advise our daughters
and uh granddaughters? That's a very
crucial question. You know, someone
reminded me again it's it's very
important to be to put put matters into
perspective. Someone reminded me that if
you take the familial breast cancer,
just the familial breast cancer, this is
breast cancer that's moving that's known
to move in your family. So there's
clearly a genetic component there. And
you ask the the fraction what is the
fraction of bracka one bracka 2 and
other couple of other genes that
explains familiar breast cancer we're
not even up to 50%. And that that what
that means is that 75% let's say give or
take a few percent 75% of familial
breast cancer where you know that
there's a gene clearly involved is
inexplicable by our current genetic
testing. So it just and that's just
familiar breast cancer by the So that
means that of course a large part of
breast cancer is not even familial and
therefore there are many many more
genes. So it is just a reminder of what
we're up against in terms of the the
complexity of breast cancer. Now that
said uh the the investment in the human
genome and subsequently the cancer
genome projects has already revealed new
genes. So if you think of a pie chart
and again we plotted this out recently.
If you think of a pie chart, um you
know, you have a sing you have you have
a little bit occupied, but now you add
the human genome and the cancer genome
project and already you're seeing a
little shift. You're beginning to see
new genes pop up at a lower frequency
than bracka 1 and bracka 2 uh which
begin to explain familiar breast cancer.
In fact, more in more recent news, you
you'll hear about a couple more such
genes that have come out. So bit by bit,
step by step by step, this curve, this
pie chart will fill out until we're at
least up to 50, maybe 75% for familial
breast cancer. And then the next
frontier is non-familiar variations of
breast cancer. What a last question to
the gentleman uh in in the front row in
the back. And then ladies and gentlemen,
uh uh uh Dr. Mukerji will remain to sign
books uh and talk and chat and and chat.
Thank you. I didn't know if you had
another interview after this. He's been
on quite quite the moment. Dennis, my
name is Dennis Turp. Uh, sorry, two
questions. How did writing the book uh
influence your own research? I mean, did
you have any aha moments as a result of
doing the research for the book? And how
do you see the war on cancer playing out
in a country like India? Those are very
good questions.
Um Um, so I I'll take the second
question first and the last question.
I'll switch the order of the questions
around. Um well you
know India is undergoing the India men
and women in India are just beginning
the climb towards longevity as well
which unleashes cancer. So if it's not
clear to anyone today it will become
clear very soon that in India too there
has been an unleashing of cancer and
again we're not talking about cancer in
the late old age. I'm talking about
cancer in the 60s 6570s which as people
have have started saying in the media is
the new young age right so as the
population is aging in general we are
meeting 60s and 65 has become a
different fundamentally different than
it was a decade ago or two decades ago I
should say um so in India you know at
present um the the one very one one very
one very clearly emerging factor is lung
cancer um and that is because of the
incredible penetration of smoke smoking
particularly tobacco companies in the
third world. I mean just as in the book
says you know the mar the you know once
once America stopped being marbor
country uh other countries had to be um
so and India is one of them China is
another one of them um and and the
machin the level of machination that has
gone on will even for people who are
skeptical about tobacco I think is
surprising so the level of machination
that's gone into making this movement
away from America into the third world
such that there are there's the master
settlement agreement here and and
cigarette companies have now come out as
as the the new the new wonder the wonder
kint of you know they've they've
rectified their sins and are now not
happening go to India go to China and
you will see that that that myth
debunked in a in a in a nancond so so so
evolving fronts in India involve
tackling the smoking epidemic not an
easy task and then tackling major
cancers breast cancer being one of them
um among among in a in a gradually aging
population. Let me give you one very
moving thought um which someone just
asked me recently. I I I was on um I was
on one one of the shows and and they
they said well remind us about your
experiences in India and I said the
first time I went to um visit a I was
particularly interested in childhood
leukemia in India because of course that
becomes you know it's kind of a beacon
in this book and in a in a country where
where resources of course there there's
an enormous amount of wealth in India
but in a country where resources are
also very very limited you have to give
a child a seven or eight drug toxic the
chemotherapy over the course of two
years to cure that child. Um how does
this occur in India? So I went to the
all Indian of medical sciences invited
to the wards. I went up to the wards to
look at these kids and these kids
there's only one or two such hospitals.
So they're coming from every part of the
country. They're essentially their
parents are packing their bags up and
coming to live in Delhi with their
relatives with their child who's ill and
putting them in this in this government
run and government funded ward and and
the child is now being taken care of.
This is by the way a curable disease. Um
and and and I I was I was I was up at
the wards and I was walking down from
the wards when just outside in in the
full sun I found something very very
interesting. a um uh an an NGO had taken
over this outside and they pitched a
small tent and inside that tent um these
uh these workers these NGO volunteers
were uh had put set up a little
classroom such that the kids once they
had finished their treatment would come
down and they could get a little bit of
education along with because it's a
two-year process one and a half year
process sometimes. Um, another person at
another end of uh that tent was was um
matching these kids with donors who
could possibly fund their chemotherapy.
So, you know, if you if so there's
there's a matching process so that you
don't blindly give money, you actually
know that you've saved the life of this
one child. Um, and and most
interestingly, so you know, there was
you you you go into this hospital,
there's this huge hall of kids waiting.
This is from kids from every part of the
country waiting. And what was amazing is
this NGO has sent its fingerlings
through the hall and they pull you out
from while you're waiting for your
doctor. They pull you out and they say,
"Well, why don't you come and chat with
us? We'll find a way to match you." And
they know the nurses. They've made
friends with the nurses so you don't
lose your turn. Now, I I it's hard hard
for me to tell you how how moving that
experience was for me because here's
here's here here's a country that's
depleted in resources, but the but the
inventiveness, the resilience, the
capacity to climb back through back
circles and find a way to give these
kids um
therapy, I mean, I I came back and I was
I was writing about this. I said I came
back and I said, if we can do that, then
then we'll walk ourselves out of this
epidemic. Um, was there another
question? the question about your your
writing the book and whether that's
influenced the course of your research.
Absolutely. I mean you know the the way
that it's influenced I mean there are
thousand ways um but in some ways I
think it's influenced the course of my
research not not actually but
metaphysically u in the sense that I go
to the laboratory and you know things
like the the role of incremental
advances the iterative process of
science um the capacity to be proved
wrong and then come back and and then
and then get the story right again um
the capacity to bounce back um is
something that's that has influenced me
personally very deep deeply and and the
first time my my my lab mates lab
partners and also the people who work
with me and under me read the book they
they echoed that and it was very
gratifying to hear that uh ladies and
gentlemen if there was any doubt before
whether you would enjoy this book I'm
sure it's now been shattered I'd like to
thank Dr. Mukerji very much and he will
be joining us for conversation.